Around 2,400 years ago, Aristotle produced groundbreaking science on ‘generation’ or reproduction. Some of his claims about animals and humans are startling: elephants prefer lonely places to copulate; fish lack testicles; males are conceived when the north wind blows. His findings are set out in the Generation of Animals, a book that crashed meteor-like into the classical world. I love this study for its joy in nature – and for the picture it conjures of the philosopher hiding in a bush, watching hedgehogs copulate ‘belly to belly’. Yet it has a dark side. Its science is set within a complex philosophy of generation, one that assumes men are better than women. While detailing how humans develop in the womb, Aristotle explains why women are inferior, rationalising sexism. Unsurprisingly, this tangling of science and sexism led to problems.

Aristotle’s work drew on two sources. One was even older theories of reproduction. How, sages asked, do humans make more humans? First, people do not reproduce by themselves. Women do not spontaneously become pregnant – instead, conception seemed to require sexual intercourse with male ejaculation. (Ancient Greeks assumed that only men could ejaculate sperm, and only women could become pregnant.) Second, children can resemble their fathers or mothers. To explain these observations, theorists deemed that men and women must each contribute something to the creation of a baby. This explains why people cannot reproduce alone, and why children can resemble either parent.

These ancient theories connected life with moisture and heat, an association that goes back at least to the poets Homer and Hesiod. They describe mortals as warm and wet, the dead as cold and dry. One reason for connecting life with heat is that the Greeks worshipped Apollo, the Sun god. Another is observation: living animals are warm, dead bodies are cold. And living animals bleed, dead bodies don’t. (One philosopher, Anaximander of Miletus, associated life with wetness so strongly he claimed humans must have emerged from fish.) Ancient philosophers and poets also used ideas about opposites. North, south. Mountains, valleys. Angels, demons. Aristotle describes a Table of Opposites created by Pythagorean
